---
layout: post
title: "I had a surgery"
---

One big highlight of 2020 of me is that I had a surgery.

### Before
Around March, 2020, I started to cough. I didn't care much since I had always been very healthy growing up(I was rarely sick or have problems with health growing up). With normal diseases I will let it get away by itself. But the cough didn't stop for around two months straight. I had a city scan at a local hospital it clearly shows a tumor in my chest. My family wanted to put me in the best hostpial. After done some research, we decided to perform the surgery at Choray(the so-called best hospital from the South). I had done a few more CT scans at a some hospital. Many doctors told me that my case was hard and the rate of dying on the operating table is high. I really didn't think much about about that
### In hospital
I was hospitalized 10 days before the surgery day. I could have had the surgery at the 6-th day(Thursday) but it was delayed to the 7-th day(Friday) since there was another girl dying and I was then announced later in the day that I would get my surgery on the next Monday since the crew need to relax. I wasn't nervous but I found this quite funny I didn't mind about it much.
I was mentally and physically strong during those 10 days. The hospital doesn't provided sockets so patients have to get to charge electrical devices through power banks which is quite adsurd but I'm sure they have a reason. The food wasn't very tasty but it's acceptable I felt uncomfortable for the first few days but I had gotten used to it. In hospital, you don't get to do a lot things and there isn't much personal space so you get to do what I normally do at home. I've got to stay busy and waited for the days went by. Other than having meals and doing personal hygienes(some times go and do some tests), I only read and get to talk to other patients
These are a few misc things I have done during those 10 days
- Study about the doctor going to perform the surgery on me on the Internet
- Learn a bunch of things about how a typical surgery is done. I found this very interesting.
- Read When the breath becomes air. I definitely relate and be compassionate to the case of Dr. Kalanithi.
- Learn about other people's diseases. There are a lot I had never even heared of.
### After
I woke up early on the surgery day, got dressed and moved to the operating theather down in floor 2. I was put on a gurney and a nurse brought me to the room number 11. I did some chit-chat with the nurses until 2, 3 more people came in, discussing about how they would open my chest(they ain't the main doctor!) and then a doctor put a needle to my hand and gave me  an anesthesia, I was put in a coma at 8:30 a.m. I remember I woke up at around 9:30 p.m(I knew it exactly since there was a clock right in front of my eye :D), feeling good and very sleepy. I was so happy and proud of myself that I was alive and it's (all) done. I was happy to the point that I didn't want to get back to sleep. For no reason one, I joked to a nurse when she came to see me "I want to go home" and she laughed very hard. Around 15 minutes later I was moved to my old room, seeing my father waiting for me, 2, 3 people lifted me up and put on my bed. Later, I happened to know that the surgery had finished at 2 p.m and I had been moved to the ICU right after that.

#### P/S
2020 was more than a tragic year to me, my writing above don't include many harsh details behind the whole story.